posts/2012-01-17-BK-trees.md, before:

---
title: BK-Trees
description: A cool algorithm for similarity search
tags: haskell, algorithms
---

A [BK-Tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BK-tree) is a really cool data
structure for building a "dictionary" of similar words. It can be used to guess
that you meant "cat" when you wrote "cta". It works by building a tree with
words from a dictionary by using the first word as a root node and then
attaching subsequent words with a branch of length *d(root_word,
new_word)* where *d* is a function for finding the "distance" between two words.
This is usually the [Levenshtein_
distance](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance), i.e. the minimum
number of edits needed to transform one string into the other.

If the branch is "taken", i.e. there is already another word connected along a
branch of length *d(root_word, new_word)*, the insert operation is done on this
word instead. That is the whole algorithm for constructing the BK-tree.

So if we have the following list of words: `["cat", "cut", "hat", "man",
"hit"]`, we will start by creating a "cat" node with no children. To add "cut"
we calculate the Levensteinh distance to be one and insert it under the "cat"
node.

![1) Cut is inserted under cat with a branch of length one](/images/bk16.png)

![2) The Levensteinh distance between "cat" and "man" is two, so "man" is connected with a branch of length two](/images/bk24.png)

![3) d("hat","cat") = 1, so the insertion operation is done on the "cut" node, and "hat" is connected to "cut" with a branch of length two (d("cut","hat")=2)](/images/bk34.png)

![4) d("cat","man") = 2, so the insertion operation is done on the "man" node, and "hit" is connected to "man" with a branch of length three (d("man","hit")=3)](/images/bk45.png)

The lookup algorithm is also quite simple: We find the distance from the query
word to the root node and then find all the child nodes in the range
*[(d-n),(d+n)]* where *d* is the distance and *n* is the maximum distance we
will allow. We then recursively query the nodes that matched. The result is a
list of words satisfying *d(query_word, word) ≤ n*.

The following code is a Haskell implementation of BK-Trees.

~~~{.haskell}
import qualified Data.Map as M
import Control.Applicative
import Data.Maybe (mapMaybe)

-- A BK-Tree is has a root word and more trees connected to it with branches of
-- lengths equal to the Levenshtein distance between their root words (i.e. an
-- n-ary tree).
data BKTree s = BKTree s (M.Map Int (BKTree s)) | Empty deriving (Show)

-- Inserting a word is done by inserting it along a branch of lenght
-- [Levenshtein distance] between the word to be inserted and the root. If
-- there is a child node there, change focus to that child and continue the
-- operation.
insertWord :: BKTree String -> String -> BKTree String
insertWord Empty  newWord               = BKTree newWord M.empty
insertWord (BKTree rootWord ts) newWord =
  case M.lookup d ts of
       Nothing -> BKTree rootWord (M.insert d (BKTree newWord M.empty) ts)
       Just c  -> BKTree rootWord (M.adjust (flip insertWord $ newWord) d ts)
    where d = levenshtein rootWord newWord

-- Querying the tree consists of checking the Levenshtein distance for the
-- current node, then recursively checking all child nodes connected with a
-- branch of length [(d-n),(d+n)]
query :: Int -> String -> BKTree String -> [String]
query n queryWord (BKTree rootWord ts) = if d <= n
                                            then rootWord:ms
                                            else ms
  where -- Levenshtein distance from query word to this node's word
        d  = levenshtein rootWord queryWord
        -- find child nodes in the range [(d-n),(d+n)] ...
        cs = mapMaybe (`M.lookup` ts) [(d-n)..(d+n)]
        -- ... recursively query these child nodes and concatenate the results
        ms = concatMap (query n queryWord) cs

-- Levenshtein distance calculation function taken from
-- en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Algorithm_Implementation/Strings/Levenshtein_distance
levenshtein :: (Eq t) => [t] -> [t] -> Int
levenshtein sa sb = last $ foldl transform [0..length sa] sb
    where transform xs@(x:xs') c = scanl compute (x+1) (zip3 sa xs xs')
              where compute z (c', x, y) = minimum [y+1, z+1, x + fromEnum (c' /= c)]

ask :: BKTree String -> IO ()
ask bk_tree = do
      putStrLn "Enter query word: "
      queryWord <- getLine
      putStrLn "Enter max distance: "
      dist <- read <$> getLine
      print $ query dist queryWord bk_tree
      ask bk_tree

main :: IO ()
main = do
      -- read dictionary file, skipping comments
      dic <- (filter (not . comment) . lines) <$> readFile "dictionary.txt"

      -- build BK-Tree
      let bk_tree = foldl (insertWord) Empty dic

      ask bk_tree
  where comment []      = True
        comment ('#':_) = True
        comment _       = False
~~~

It even works! Here are a few examples where I used a dictionary of ~5800 words:

    λ> query 1 "thie" bk_tree
    ["tie","the","this","thief"]
    λ> query 1 "catt" bk_tree
    ["cat","cart"]

Commit message:

clarification about lookup in BK-trees

posts/2012-01-17-BK-trees.md, after:

---
title: BK-Trees
description: A cool algorithm for similarity search
tags: haskell, algorithms
---

A [BK-Tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BK-tree) is a really cool data
structure for building a "dictionary" of similar words. It can be used to guess
that you meant "cat" when you wrote "cta". It works by building a tree with
words from a dictionary by using the first word as a root node and then
attaching subsequent words with a branch of length *d(root_word,
new_word)* where *d* is a function for finding the "distance" between two words.
This is usually the [Levenshtein_
distance](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance), i.e. the minimum
number of edits needed to transform one string into the other.

If the branch is "taken", i.e. there is already another word connected along a
branch of length *d(root_word, new_word)*, the insert operation is done on this
word instead. That is the whole algorithm for constructing the BK-tree.

So if we have the following list of words: `["cat", "cut", "hat", "man",
"hit"]`, we will start by creating a "cat" node with no children. To add "cut"
we calculate the Levensteinh distance to be one and insert it under the "cat"
node.

![1) Cut is inserted under cat with a branch of length one](/images/bk16.png)

![2) The Levensteinh distance between "cat" and "man" is two, so "man" is connected with a branch of length two](/images/bk24.png)

![3) d("hat","cat") = 1, so the insertion operation is done on the "cut" node, and "hat" is connected to "cut" with a branch of length two (d("cut","hat")=2)](/images/bk34.png)

![4) d("cat","man") = 2, so the insertion operation is done on the "man" node, and "hit" is connected to "man" with a branch of length three (d("man","hit")=3)](/images/bk45.png)

The query algorithm is also simple: We find the distance *d* from the query word
to the root node. If this is less than the maximum distance we allow, *n*, we
include this word in the result. We then find all the child nodes connected by
branches of length *(d-n) ≤ l ≤ (d+n)* and recursively query these nodes
and add to the result. The result is a list of words satisfying *d(query_word,
word) ≤ n*.

The following code is a Haskell implementation of BK-Trees.

~~~{.haskell}
import qualified Data.Map as M
import Control.Applicative
import Data.Maybe (mapMaybe)

-- A BK-Tree is has a root word and more trees connected to it with branches of
-- lengths equal to the Levenshtein distance between their root words (i.e. an
-- n-ary tree).
data BKTree s = BKTree s (M.Map Int (BKTree s)) | Empty deriving (Show)

-- Inserting a word is done by inserting it along a branch of lenght
-- [Levenshtein distance] between the word to be inserted and the root. If
-- there is a child node there, change focus to that child and continue the
-- operation.
insertWord :: BKTree String -> String -> BKTree String
insertWord Empty  newWord               = BKTree newWord M.empty
insertWord (BKTree rootWord ts) newWord =
  case M.lookup d ts of
       Nothing -> BKTree rootWord (M.insert d (BKTree newWord M.empty) ts)
       Just c  -> BKTree rootWord (M.adjust (flip insertWord $ newWord) d ts)
    where d = levenshtein rootWord newWord

-- Querying the tree consists of checking the Levenshtein distance for the
-- current node, then recursively checking all child nodes connected with a
-- branch of length [(d-n),(d+n)]
query :: Int -> String -> BKTree String -> [String]
query n queryWord (BKTree rootWord ts) = if d <= n
                                            then rootWord:ms
                                            else ms
  where -- Levenshtein distance from query word to this node's word
        d  = levenshtein rootWord queryWord
        -- find child nodes in the range [(d-n),(d+n)] ...
        cs = mapMaybe (`M.lookup` ts) [(d-n)..(d+n)]
        -- ... recursively query these child nodes and concatenate the results
        ms = concatMap (query n queryWord) cs

-- Levenshtein distance calculation function taken from
-- en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Algorithm_Implementation/Strings/Levenshtein_distance
levenshtein :: (Eq t) => [t] -> [t] -> Int
levenshtein sa sb = last $ foldl transform [0..length sa] sb
    where transform xs@(x:xs') c = scanl compute (x+1) (zip3 sa xs xs')
              where compute z (c', x, y) = minimum [y+1, z+1, x + fromEnum (c' /= c)]

ask :: BKTree String -> IO ()
ask bk_tree = do
      putStrLn "Enter query word: "
      queryWord <- getLine
      putStrLn "Enter max distance: "
      dist <- read <$> getLine
      print $ query dist queryWord bk_tree
      ask bk_tree

main :: IO ()
main = do
      -- read dictionary file, skipping comments
      dic <- (filter (not . comment) . lines) <$> readFile "dictionary.txt"

      -- build BK-Tree
      let bk_tree = foldl (insertWord) Empty dic

      ask bk_tree
  where comment []      = True
        comment ('#':_) = True
        comment _       = False
~~~

It even works! Here are a few examples where I used a dictionary of ~5800 words:

    λ> query 1 "thie" bk_tree
    ["tie","the","this","thief"]
    λ> query 1 "catt" bk_tree
    ["cat","cart"]
